_drafts/how-i-collect-telemetry-from-batect-users.md, before:

---
layout: post
title: "How I collect telemetry from Batect users"
tags: open-source telemetry google-cloud bigquery golang batect
comments: true
---

I'm constantly asking myself a bunch of questions to help improve Batect: are Batect's users having a good experience? What's not working well? How are they using Batect?
What could Batect do to make their lives easier?

I first released [Batect](https://batect.dev) back in 2017. Since then, the userbase has grown from a handful of people that could fit around a single
desk to hundreds of people all over the globe.

Back when everyone could fit around a desk, answering these questions was easy: I could stand up, walk over to someone, and ask them. (Or, if I was feeling particularly
lazy, I could just stay seated and ask over the top of my screen.) 

But with this growth in use, now I have another question: how do I break out of my bubble and feedback and ideas from those I don't know?

This is where telemetry data comes into the picture. In addition to feedback signals like GitHub issues, discussions, suggestions and the surveys I occasionally run,
telemetry data has been invaluable to help me get a broader understanding of how users use Batect, the problems they run into and the environments they use Batect in.
This in turn has helped me prioritise the features and improvements that will have the greatest impact and design them in a way that will be the most useful for Batect's users.

In this (admittedly very long) post, I'm going to talk through what I mean by telemetry data, how I went about designing the telemetry collection system, Abacus, and finish 
off with two stories of how I've used this data.

**_TABLE OF CONTENTS HERE?_**

## Telemetry?

* What is telemetry?

Similar to Honeycomb's definition of observability for production systems, I wanted to be able to answer questions about Batect and it's users I haven't even thought of yet.

**_add link to definition of observability above_**

## Key design considerations

There were a couple of key aspects I was considering as I sketched out what the telemetry collection system could look like, in rough priority order:

* Privacy and security: given the situations and environments where Batect is used, preserving users' and organisations' security
  and privacy are critical. This is not only because it's simply the right thing to do, but because any issues here would likely lead to a loss of trust and to them
  blocking telemetry data or not using Batect, which is obviously not what I want.

* Cost: any expense to build or run the system would be coming out of my own pocket, so minimising the cost was important to me.

* Ease of maintenance: this is something I largely maintain in my own time, so minimising the amount of ongoing care and feeding was another high priority.
  Another aspect of this was also designing something simple and easy to understand, so that when I come back to do any future maintenance, it would be quick and easy, 
  rather than necessitate spending a lot of time to re-learn an obscure tool, service or library.

* User experience impact: Batect is part of developers' core feedback loop, and so any changes that made it noticably less reliable or less performant
  were non-starters.

* Flexibility: I want to be able to investigate new ideas and answer questions I haven't thought of yet, as well as expand the data I'm collecting as 
  Batect evolves, and so I needed a system that supports these goals.

* Learning: given I was building this on my own time, I also wanted to use this as an opportunity to learn more about a few technologies and techniques I hadn't used much before.

## The design

[![Diagram showing main components in the system and the steps in data flow](/images/2022/abacus-overview.svg)](/images/2022/abacus-overview.svg)
_Diagram showing main components in the system and steps in data flow (click to enlarge)_

It's probably easiest to understand the overall design of the system by following the lifecycle of a single session. 

A _session_ represents a single invocation of Batect - so if you run `./batect build` and then `./batect unitTest`, this will create two telemetry sessions, 
one for each invocation.

1️⃣ As Batect runs, it builds up the session, recording information such as details about Batect, the environment it's running in and your configuration.
It also records particular events that occur, like when an error occurs or when it shows you a "new version available" notification, and captures timing spans for 
performance-sensitive operations like loading configuration files. 

Just before Batect terminates, it writes this session to disk in the upload queue, ready to be uploaded in a future invocation.

2️⃣ When Batect next runs, it will launch a background thread to check for any telemetry sessions waiting in the upload queue. 

3️⃣ Any outstanding sessions are uploaded to Abacus. Once each upload is confirmed as successful, the session is removed from disk. 

This concept of the upload queue has been really successful: uploading sessions in the background of a future invocation minimises the impact of uploading this data,
and provides a form of resilience against any transient network or service issues. (If a session can't be uploaded for some reason, Batect will try to upload it again
next time, or give up once the session is 30 days old.)

4️⃣ Once Abacus receives the session, it performs some basic validation and writes the session to a Cloud Storage bucket. Each session is assigned a unique UUID by Batect
when it is created, so Abacus uses this ID to deduplicate sessions if required.

5️⃣ Once an hour, a BigQuery Data Transfer Service job checks for new sessions in the Cloud Storage bucket and writes them to a BigQuery table.

6️⃣ With the data now in BigQuery, I can either perform ad-hoc queries over the data to answer specific questions, or use Google's free Data Studio to visualise and report on the data.

For example, I can report on what version of Batect is being used:

![Chart showing the proportion of each day's sessions, broken down by Batect version](/images/2022/abacus-batect-version.png)

Or the distribution of the number of tasks and containers in each project:

![Chart showing the proportion of each day's sessions, broken down by Batect version](/images/2022/abacus-project-size.png)

There a bunch of other important details I've skipped over here in the interest of brevity - topics like not collecting personally identifiable information,
or even potentially-identifiable information and managing consent - but these are all important aspects to consider if you're thinking of building a similar
system yourself.

## Examples of where I've used this data

Some of my favourite stories of how I've used this data are for prioritising Batect's shell tab completion functionality and validating that it had the
intended impact, and for prioritising contributing support for Batect to [Renovate](https://github.com/renovatebot/renovate).

### Shell tab completion

Batect's main user interface is the command line: to run a task, you execute a command like `./batect build` or `./batect test` from your shell.
One of the most frequently-requested features was support for shell tab completion, so that instead of typing out `build` or `test`, you could type
just the first letter or two, press <kbd>Tab</kbd>, and the rest of the task name would be completed for you.

While I could definitely see the value in this, I was worried I was over-emphasising features I'd like to see based on how I usually work and interact
with applications, and wanted to confirm that this would actually be valuable for a large portion of Batect's userbase. I formed a hypothesis that shell 
tab completion would help reduce the number of sessions that fail because the task name cannot be found, likely because of a typo. 

So, I turned to the data I had and found that roughly 2.6% of sessions fail because the task cannot be found. This seemed very high and was enough for me to
feel confident investing some time and effort implementing [shell tab completion](https://batect.dev/docs/getting-started/shell-tab-completion).

Of course, the next question was which shell to focus on first: Bash? Zsh? My personal favourite, Fish? My gut told me most people would likely be using 
Zsh or Bash as their default shell, but here the data told a different story: the shells used most commonly by Batect's users are actually Fish and Zsh.
So that's where I started - I added tab completion functionality for both Fish and Zsh - and, thanks to the data I had, I was able to prioritise my limited
time to focus on the shells that would help the largest number of users.

And, thanks once again to telemetry data, once I'd released this feature, I was also able to quickly validate my hypothesis: users that use shell tab completion experience
"task not found" errors over 30% less than those that don't use it.

### Renovate

Before: X% of sessions were using the latest available version
After: X% of sessions were using the latest available version

## In closing



If you're interested in checking out the code for Abacus, it's [available on GitHub](https://github.com/batect/abacus), as is 
[the client-side telemetry library](https://github.com/batect/batect/tree/main/libs/telemetry) used by Batect.


* "Telemetry?" section
* "Renovate" section
* "In closing" section
* Table of contents?

Commit message:

Flesh out Renovate section and tweak formatting of code blocks.

_drafts/how-i-collect-telemetry-from-batect-users.md, after:

---
layout: post
title: "How I collect telemetry from Batect users"
tags: open-source telemetry google-cloud bigquery golang batect
comments: true
---

I'm constantly asking myself a bunch of questions to help improve Batect: are Batect's users having a good experience? What's not working well? How are they using Batect?
What could Batect do to make their lives easier?

I first released [Batect](https://batect.dev) back in 2017. Since then, the userbase has grown from a handful of people that could fit around a single
desk to hundreds of people all over the globe.

Back when everyone could fit around a desk, answering these questions was easy: I could stand up, walk over to someone, and ask them. (Or, if I was feeling particularly
lazy, I could just stay seated and ask over the top of my screen.) 

But with this growth in use, now I have another question: how do I break out of my bubble and feedback and ideas from those I don't know?

This is where telemetry data comes into the picture. In addition to feedback signals like GitHub issues, discussions, suggestions and the surveys I occasionally run,
telemetry data has been invaluable to help me get a broader understanding of how users use Batect, the problems they run into and the environments they use Batect in.
This in turn has helped me prioritise the features and improvements that will have the greatest impact and design them in a way that will be the most useful for Batect's users.

In this (admittedly very long) post, I'm going to talk through what I mean by telemetry data, how I went about designing the telemetry collection system, Abacus, and finish 
off with two stories of how I've used this data.

**_TABLE OF CONTENTS HERE?_**

## Telemetry?

* What is telemetry?

Similar to Honeycomb's definition of observability for production systems, I wanted to be able to answer questions about Batect and it's users I haven't even thought of yet.

**_add link to definition of observability above_**

## Key design considerations

There were a couple of key aspects I was considering as I sketched out what the telemetry collection system could look like, in rough priority order:

* Privacy and security: given the situations and environments where Batect is used, preserving users' and organisations' security
  and privacy are critical. This is not only because it's simply the right thing to do, but because any issues here would likely lead to a loss of trust and to them
  blocking telemetry data or not using Batect, which is obviously not what I want.

* Cost: any expense to build or run the system would be coming out of my own pocket, so minimising the cost was important to me.

* Ease of maintenance: this is something I largely maintain in my own time, so minimising the amount of ongoing care and feeding was another high priority.
  Another aspect of this was also designing something simple and easy to understand, so that when I come back to do any future maintenance, it would be quick and easy, 
  rather than necessitate spending a lot of time to re-learn an obscure tool, service or library.

* User experience impact: Batect is part of developers' core feedback loop, and so any changes that made it noticably less reliable or less performant
  were non-starters.

* Flexibility: I want to be able to investigate new ideas and answer questions I haven't thought of yet, as well as expand the data I'm collecting as 
  Batect evolves, and so I needed a system that supports these goals.

* Learning: given I was building this on my own time, I also wanted to use this as an opportunity to learn more about a few technologies and techniques I hadn't used much before.

## The design

[![Diagram showing main components in the system and the steps in data flow](/images/2022/abacus-overview.svg)](/images/2022/abacus-overview.svg)
_Diagram showing main components in the system and steps in data flow (click to enlarge)_

It's probably easiest to understand the overall design of the system by following the lifecycle of a single session. 

A _session_ represents a single invocation of Batect - so if you run `./batect build` and then `./batect unitTest`, this will create two telemetry sessions, 
one for each invocation.

1️⃣ As Batect runs, it builds up the session, recording information such as details about Batect, the environment it's running in and your configuration.
It also records particular events that occur, like when an error occurs or when it shows you a "new version available" notification, and captures timing spans for 
performance-sensitive operations like loading configuration files. 

Just before Batect terminates, it writes this session to disk in the upload queue, ready to be uploaded in a future invocation.

2️⃣ When Batect next runs, it will launch a background thread to check for any telemetry sessions waiting in the upload queue. 

3️⃣ Any outstanding sessions are uploaded to Abacus. Once each upload is confirmed as successful, the session is removed from disk. 

This concept of the upload queue has been really successful: uploading sessions in the background of a future invocation minimises the impact of uploading this data,
and provides a form of resilience against any transient network or service issues. (If a session can't be uploaded for some reason, Batect will try to upload it again
next time, or give up once the session is 30 days old.)

4️⃣ Once Abacus receives the session, it performs some basic validation and writes the session to a Cloud Storage bucket. Each session is assigned a unique UUID by Batect
when it is created, so Abacus uses this ID to deduplicate sessions if required.

5️⃣ Once an hour, a BigQuery Data Transfer Service job checks for new sessions in the Cloud Storage bucket and writes them to a BigQuery table.

6️⃣ With the data now in BigQuery, I can either perform ad-hoc queries over the data to answer specific questions, or use Google's free Data Studio to visualise and report on the data.

For example, I can report on what version of Batect is being used:

![Chart showing the proportion of each day's sessions, broken down by Batect version](/images/2022/abacus-batect-version.png)

Or the distribution of the number of tasks and containers in each project:

![Chart showing the proportion of each day's sessions, broken down by Batect version](/images/2022/abacus-project-size.png)

There a bunch of other important details I've skipped over here in the interest of brevity - topics like not collecting personally identifiable information,
or even potentially-identifiable information and managing consent - but these are all important aspects to consider if you're thinking of building a similar
system yourself.

## Examples of where I've used this data

Some of my favourite stories of how I've used this data are for prioritising Batect's shell tab completion functionality and validating that it had the
intended impact, and for prioritising contributing support for Batect to [Renovate](https://github.com/renovatebot/renovate).

### Shell tab completion

Batect's main user interface is the command line: to run a task, you execute a command like `./batect build` or `./batect test` from your shell.
One of the most frequently-requested features was support for shell tab completion, so that instead of typing out `build` or `test`, you could type
just the first letter or two, press <kbd>Tab</kbd>, and the rest of the task name would be completed for you.

While I could definitely see the value in this, I was worried I was over-emphasising features I'd like to see based on how I usually work and interact
with applications, and wanted to confirm that this would actually be valuable for a large portion of Batect's userbase. I formed a hypothesis that shell 
tab completion would help reduce the number of sessions that fail because the task name cannot be found, likely because of a typo. 

So, I turned to the data I had and found that roughly 2.6% of sessions fail because the task cannot be found. This seemed very high and was enough for me to
feel confident investing some time and effort implementing [shell tab completion](https://batect.dev/docs/getting-started/shell-tab-completion).

Of course, the next question was which shell to focus on first: Bash? Zsh? My personal favourite, Fish? My gut told me most people would likely be using 
Zsh or Bash as their default shell, but here the data told a different story: the shells used most commonly by Batect's users are actually Fish and Zsh.
So that's where I started - I added tab completion functionality for both Fish and Zsh - and, thanks to the data I had, I was able to prioritise my limited
time to focus on the shells that would help the largest number of users.

And, thanks once again to telemetry data, once I'd released this feature, I was also able to quickly validate my hypothesis: users that use shell tab completion experience
"task not found" errors over 30% less than those that don't use it.

### Renovate

Batect is driven by the `batect` and `batect.cmd` wrapper scripts that you drop directly into your project and commit alongside your code.

Most of the time, this is great: you can just clone a repository and start using it without needing to install anything, and you can be confident
everyone on your team is using exactly the same version.

However, there's a drawback hiding in the last part of that sentence: this design also means that you or one of your teammates must upgrade the wrapper script
to use a new version of Batect. Based on both anecdotal evidence from users asking for features that already existed as well as telemetry data, I could
see that many teams were not upgrading regularly. And from telemetry data, I also knew this was happening even while users were seeing an upgrade nudge like this
many hundreds of times a day:

```
Version 0.79.1 of Batect is now available (you have 0.74.0).
To upgrade to the latest version, run './batect --upgrade'.
For more information, visit https://github.com/batect/batect/releases/tag/0.79.1.
```

Armed with this information, I decided to try to help users upgrade more often and more rapidly - there was little point spending time building new features and fixing bugs if only a
small proportion of users benefited from these improvements. 

My solution was to add support for Batect's wrapper script to [Renovate](https://github.com/renovatebot/renovate). This means that users can automatically receive
pull requests whenever I release a new version of Batect, and upgrading is as simple as merging the PR. 

Again, the data shows this has been a success: whereas previously, a new version would only slowly be adopted, now, new versions of Batect make up over 40% of sessions within a month
of release.

## In closing



If you're interested in checking out the code for Abacus, it's [available on GitHub](https://github.com/batect/abacus), as is 
[the client-side telemetry library](https://github.com/batect/batect/tree/main/libs/telemetry) used by Batect.


* "Telemetry?" section
* "In closing" section
* Table of contents?
